README.md, before:

CepGen
======
A generic central exclusive processes event generator
-----------------------------------------------------

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.6949077.svg)](https://zenodo.org/doi/10.5281/zenodo.6949077) [![arXiv](https://img.shields.io/badge/arXiv-1808.06059-b31b1b.svg)](https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.06059) [![Citation Badge](https://api.juleskreuer.eu/citation-badge.php?doi=10.1016/j.cpc.2021.108225)](https://juleskreuer.eu/projekte/citation-badge/)

This `git` repository provides the full history on all developments in `CepGen` since the beginning of this project (2014).
The complete manual (including instructions for installation) may be found at <https://cepgen.hepforge.org>.

For a complete reference of CepGen, please have a look at the reference paper at [Computer Physics Communications 271 (2022) 108225](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2021.108225) ([arXiv:1808.06059 [hep-ph]](https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.06059)).

See CHANGELOG (also available [here](https://cepgen.hepforge.org/changelog.html)) for a complete list of new features and fixes introduced in each version.

Commit message:

Core: adapted readme and changelog

README.md, after:

CepGen
======
A generic central exclusive processes event generator
-----------------------------------------------------

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.6949077.svg)](https://zenodo.org/doi/10.5281/zenodo.6949077) [![arXiv](https://img.shields.io/badge/arXiv-1808.06059-b31b1b.svg)](https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.06059) [![Citation Badge](https://api.juleskreuer.eu/citation-badge.php?doi=10.1016/j.cpc.2021.108225)](https://juleskreuer.eu/projekte/citation-badge/)

This repository encompasses the core library and headers, and a few "stable" add-ons enabling its interfacing to external libraries.

A hands-on manual (including instructions for installation) may be found at <https://cepgen.hepforge.org>.
However for a complete reference of CepGen, please have a look at the reference paper at [Computer Physics Communications 271 (2022) 108225](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2021.108225) ([arXiv:1808.06059 [hep-ph]](https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.06059)).

See the [changelog](https://cepgen.hepforge.org/changelog) listing the new features and fixes introduced in each release.
